# Weekly Sync 27.5.2020

Created: May 22, 2020 5:12 PM
Created By: Henry He
Last Edited Time: Aug 29, 2020 4:51 PM


# What happened last week?

- Reviewed chapter 2 in Bertsekas DPA book
- Understood how the transition probabilities are taken into account
- Reviewed C++ basics
- Opened new branch `gilbert_elliot` on repository
- Successfully compiled existing codebase

    `Eigen/src/Core/util/IntegralConstant.h:57:36: warning: unused parameter 'other' [-Wunused parameter] FixedInt( VariableAndFixedInt<N> other) {`

- Running simulation takes a lot of time on my Mac (~40min) → runtime depends on the *Horizon*
- Started looking into the code `Network/basestation.cpp` as starting point
    - Commenting with doxygen → Easier to compile documentation in the future
- Englischnachweis für RCI

# What am I doing this week?

- Continuing understanding codebase
- Get In-depth knowledge about Gilbert-Elliot channel model
- Implement Gilbert-Elliot model → compile as an option like different type of schedulers already or later? → parameter of Gilbert-Elliot model how?
- Modify FH scheduler to cope with Gilbert-Elliot → Which fashion?
- Does the only the FH scheduler model modified with Gilbert-Elliot model or also the actual simulation environment use new channel model
- How to test my modified test without compiling the whole simulation → unit tests

# Potential blockers?

- Qt is only used to save the JSON Logs
- Possibility to convert to cmake project without Qt
    - Find a way to save to JSON without Qt
- Model parameterization:
    - 0.25 loss for good state
    - 0.75 loss for bad state
- Simulation should also behave according to the Gilber-Elliot model. Network operates this way → `MobileTerminal.*` only 2 lines
- This information should be known to the scheduler→ more complicated part
- Start with the simulation part → implement state machine → parameters in `networkconfig.h`
    - Transition probability Good to Bad
    - Transition probability Bad to Good
    - Success in Good state
    - Success in Bad state

    → switch case

- Testing
    - *Simulation*: With the average loss probability of the model check empirically how many where packets were lost / total ul packets to verify
    - *Scheduler*: verification more complicated because No expected results of the scheduler using the new model e.g. Throughput etc.
        - See the results have a trend with increasing H it converges
        - Debug outputs → Onur will think about it
        - assert
- Content of thesis: results of gilbert elliot scheduler
- Possible add-on cmake

# Action Items

- [x]  Implement GIlbert-Elliot model itself
